- Hi, and welcome to today's episode of What That Means,
part of the Cybersecurity Inside Podcast.
We're gonna talk about machine consciousness today
with Joscha Bach.
He is a principal researcher in Intel Labs
focused on artificial intelligence.
I would argue he's also a philosopher.
Welcome to the show, Joscha.
- Thank you.
Thanks for having me, Camille.
- I'm really happy to talk with you today
and this is like an enormous topic.
I mean it's kind of been all over the news last few months
and I wonder that we just start with defining consciousness.
I think that when we started
to look at artificial intelligence,
we looked at you know, well what is intelligence?
So if we start to look at machine consciousness,
maybe we should start by looking at what is consciousness?
- That's a tricky one.
So colloquially consciousness is the feeling
of what it's like, right.
There is a certain kind of experience that we have,
the phenomenology of experience
that makes consciousness very specific and distinct.
And so we know what indexically by pointing at it.
And if we go a little bit more closely
and dive into the introspection of consciousness,
we find that there is an consciousness
that relates to the awareness of contents, right.
So at any given point,
I'm aware of certain features in my experience,
and then I am aware of the mode
in which I attend to these features.
For instance, I might have them as hypotheticals
or as selections in my perception
or as memories and so on, right.
So I can attend to things in very different modes
and that's part of my experience.
And third, there is reflexive consciousness.
The awareness that I am aware of something
that I am the observer.
But you can also be conscious without having a self.
For instance, in dreams at night,
you might not be entangled to the world around you.
So you don't have access to sensory data.
So your mind is just exploring the latent dimensions
of the spaces that you have made models of.
And you don't need to be present as an agent, as a self.
So consciousness is not the same thing as the self.
Different perspective that we might take on consciousness
is with respect to the functions that it fulfills.
So there's a certain degree of a vagueness and lucidity
that we associate with consciousness.
When we are unconscious, we are,
there's nobody home.
And I call this the conductor theory of consciousness.
Imagine that your mind is like an orchestra
that is made of something like 50 brain areas, give or take,
which correspond to the instruments of an orchestra.
And each of these instruments is playing its own role
in loose connections with its neighbors.
So it picks up on the processing signals
that the neighbors give and it takes that
as its input to riff on them.
And so the whole orchestra is playing
and it doesn't need a conductor to play.
It can just do free jazz because
it just entrained itself with a lot of patterns.
But if you are in the free jazz mode,
you are a sleepwalker.
There's nobody home.
And a sleepwalker is somebody who is able
of quite complex tasks,
like sleepwalkers might sometimes get up
and open the fridge and make dinner,
but they do this randomly.
It's just an automatic process.
And if you talk to them,
their responses make no sense unless they wake up.
And this waking up means that they become fully coherent.
And the purpose of the conductor
is to create coherence in the mind.
- Well, I was just gonna ask why,
why are we constructing these models?
I mean these are essentially models to learn.
- Yeah, to make sense of reality.
You can also be conscious without the ability to learn,
but you to update your working memory
and consciousness relates also to the ability
to make index memories.
But if you want to understand a complicated reality,
you may need to construct.
And constructing means that you need to backtrack.
You need to remember what you tried
and what worked and what didn't.
So when you wake up in a poorly lit room
and you try to make sense of your surroundings,
you might have to disaggregate in a search process.
And the search process requires that you have a memory
of what you tried.
And this index memory, not just of this moment,
but also over time when we learn,
when we try to figure out what worked and what didn't,
requires that you have this integration
over the things that you did
as the observer that makes sense of reality.
And this gives rise to a stream of consciousness.
- So who is the you in this sense?
When you say you know, you wake up,
or there is somebody home,
like who is that you?
- It's an emergent pattern.
There is not a physical thing that it's like to be me.
I don't have an identity beyond the construction
of an identity.
So identity is in some sense an invention of my mind
to make sense of reality by just assigning different objects
to the same world line and say that this object
is probably best understood as a continuation
of a previous object that has gradually changed.
And we use this to make sense of reality.
If we don't assume this kind of information object,
identity preservation, we will have problems
to make sense of reality, right.
And we pretend to ourselves that identity objectively exists
because it's almost impossible
to make sense of reality otherwise.
But you and me, we are not more real
than a voice in the wind
that blows through the mountains, right.
So you could say that the geography of the mountains
is somewhat real,
the structures that we have untrained our brain with.
But the story that is being created is affirm or all.
We stop existing as soon as we fall asleep
or as soon as we stop paying attention.
- Hmm, so the awareness is the construct
of our existence and we don't exist-
- It's the process that creates that these objects.
And so the self is the story
that the brain tells itself about the person.
